=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

Data::Page - Help when paging through sets of results

=head1 VERSION

version 2.05

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use Data::Page;

  my $page = Data::Page->new();
  $page->total_entries($total_entries);
  $page->entries_per_page($entries_per_page);
  $page->current_page($current_page);

  print "         First page: ", $page->first_page, "\n";
  print "          Last page: ", $page->last_page, "\n";
  print "First entry on page: ", $page->first, "\n";
  print " Last entry on page: ", $page->last, "\n";

=head1 DESCRIPTION

When searching through large amounts of data, it is often the case
that a result set is returned that is larger than we want to display
on one page. This results in wanting to page through various pages of
data. The maths behind this is unfortunately fiddly, hence this
module.

The main concept is that you pass in the number of total entries, the
number of entries per page, and the current page number. You can then
call methods to find out how many pages of information there are, and
what number the first and last entries on the current page really are.

For example, say we wished to page through the integers from 1 to 100
with 20 entries per page. The first page would consist of 1-20, the
second page from 21-40, the third page from 41-60, the fourth page
from 61-80 and the fifth page from 81-100. This module would help you
work this out.

=head1 METHODS

=head2 new

This is the constructor, which takes no arguments.

  my $page = Data::Page->new();

There is also an old, deprecated constructor, which currently takes
two mandatory arguments, the total number of entries and the number of
entries per page. It also optionally takes the current page number:

  my $page = Data::Page->new($total_entries, $entries_per_page, $current_page);

=head2 total_entries

This method get or sets the total number of entries:

  print "Entries:", $page->total_entries, "\n";

=head2 entries_per_page

This method gets or sets the total number of entries per page (which
defaults to 10):

  print "Per page:", $page->entries_per_page, "\n";

=head2 current_page

This method gets or sets the current page number (which defaults to 1):

  print "Page: ", $page->current_page, "\n";

The page number cannot be set to less than 1 or later than the last page:
if such a value is passed, it is clamped to [1, num_pages].

=head2 entries_on_this_page

This methods returns the number of entries on the current page:

  print "There are ", $page->entries_on_this_page, " entries displayed\n";

=head2 first_page

This method returns the first page. This is put in for reasons of
symmetry with last_page, as it always returns 1:

  print "Pages range from: ", $page->first_page, "\n";

=head2 last_page

This method returns the total number of pages of information:

  print "Pages range to: ", $page->last_page, "\n";

=head2 first

This method returns the number of the first entry on the current page:

  print "Showing entries from: ", $page->first, "\n";

=head2 last

This method returns the number of the last entry on the current page:

  print "Showing entries to: ", $page->last, "\n";

=head2 previous_page

This method returns the previous page number, if one exists. Otherwise
it returns undefined:

  if ($page->previous_page) {
    print "Previous page number: ", $page->previous_page, "\n";
  }

=head2 next_page

This method returns the next page number, if one exists. Otherwise
it returns undefined:

  if ($page->next_page) {
    print "Next page number: ", $page->next_page, "\n";
  }

=head2 splice

This method takes in a listref, and returns only the values which are
on the current page:

  @visible_holidays = $page->splice(\@holidays);

=head2 skipped

This method is useful for paging through data in a database using SQL
LIMIT clauses. It is simply C<< $page->first - 1 >>:

  $sth = $dbh->prepare(
    q{SELECT * FROM table ORDER BY rec_date LIMIT ?, ?}
  );
  $sth->execute($page->skipped, $page->entries_per_page);

=head2 change_entries_per_page

This method changes the number of entries per page and the current page number
such that the L</first> item on the current page will be present on the new page.

 $page->total_entries(50);
 $page->entries_per_page(20);
 $page->current_page(3);
 print $page->first; # 41
 $page->change_entries_per_page(30);
 print $page->current_page; # 2 - the page that item 41 will show in

=head1 NOTES

It has been said before that this code is "too simple" for CPAN, but I
must disagree. I have seen people write this kind of code over and
over again and they always get it wrong. Perhaps now they will spend
more time getting the rest of their code right...

=head1 SEE ALSO

Related modules which may be of interest: L<Data::Pageset>,
L<Data::Page::Tied>, L<Data::SpreadPagination>.

=head1 SUPPORT

Bugs may be submitted through L<the RT bug tracker|https://rt.cpan.org/Public/Dist/Display.html?Name=Data-Page>
(or L<bug-Data-Page@rt.cpan.org|mailto:bug-Data-Page@rt.cpan.org>).

=head1 AUTHOR

Based on code originally by Leo Lapworth, with many changes added by
by Leon Brocard <acme@astray.com>.

=head1 CONTRIBUTORS

=for stopwords Karen Etheridge James Laver

=over 4

=item *

Karen Etheridge <ether@cpan.org>

=item *

James Laver <elpenguin@cpan.org>

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

This software is copyright (c) 2000 by Léon Brocard.

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.

=cut
